🛡️ NetGuard IDS - Final Year Project

A lightweight, deployable Network Intrusion Detection System built with Python (FastAPI, Scapy), React, and Docker.

This project is a fully-functional, real-world-ready application that monitors network traffic, detects common threats, and displays them on a live dashboard.

Features

Real-time Packet Sniffing: Uses Scapy to monitor a specified network interface.

Signature-Based Detection: Detects common attacks (Port Scans, SSH Brute Force, Nmap Xmas Scans, ICMP Floods).

Stateful Analysis: Tracks attacks over time (e.g., 5 SSH attempts in 60 seconds).

Real-time Dashboard: A modern React frontend with live alerts via WebSockets.

Analytics: See charts for top attackers and alert types.

Containerized: Fully deployable with a single docker-compose command.

Easy to Understand: Clear 3-tier architecture (Frontend, Backend, Database).

Architecture

The system consists of three main services managed by Docker Compose:

Frontend (frontend): A React application (built with Vite) and served by Nginx. It displays the dashboard and communicates with the backend.

Backend (backend): A FastAPI (Python) application that:

Spawns a thread to run the Scapy Sniffer.

Uses a Detection Engine to analyze packets.

Saves alerts to the Database.

Provides a REST API (/api) for the frontend.

Manages a WebSocket (/api/ws) to push live alerts.

Database (database): A PostgreSQL database to store and persist all generated alerts.

🚀 How to Run (Quick Start)

Prerequisites

Docker

Docker Compose

Installation

Clone the project:
(Or just create the files and folders as shown).

Create your Environment File:
In the root netguard-ids/ directory, copy the example:

cp .env.example .env


Edit your .env file:
Open the new .env file and:

Set a secure DB_PASSWORD.

CRITICAL: Change NETWORK_INTERFACE to your computer's active network interface.

On Linux/macOS, find this with ifconfig or ip addr.

Common names are eth0, en0, wlan0.

Build and Run the System:
From the root netguard-ids/ directory, run:

docker-compose build
docker-compose up -d


Access the System:

Frontend Dashboard: http://localhost:3000

Backend API Docs: http://localhost:8000/docs

🧪 How to Test

Once the IDS is running, you can simulate attacks to see alerts appear on the dashboard.

Port Scan:

nmap -p 1-1000 localhost


Xmas Scan:

nmap -sX localhost


SSH Brute Force (run 5+ times):

ssh user@localhost


ICMP Flood (requires root):

sudo ping -f localhost -c 200
